

I am using fountain to write a screenplay. If you are writing a screenplay, I would highly recommend it. There are many benefits far beyond just the simplicity of writing. 

I am deep in the process of writing my first screenplay. When I first started, I just opened my text editor and wrote. I was unaware of the specifics of the standard screenplay format. I really didn't think it mattered as long as I was putting my ideas down. As I started telling more people about what I was doing, I got a lot of suggestions on how I should do it, and essentially that I was doing it wrong.

I'm a process oriented person. I like to take a look at the way 10 different people approach a problem and decide which steps, methods, and tools might work for me. I like processes that work for me, designed by me, or at least customized by me. I think everyone does, to varying degrees.

No one wants to cut their lawn with scissors.

A concerned writer told me, "You have to use Final Draft. It is the tool everyone uses to write screenplays. There are other programs, but they are really a waste of time." Final Draft is a software application specifically designed to write screenplays. With this new magical tool, perhaps it will transform my screenplay writing experience to the next level. I will look at my time before using Final Draft as a complete waste, and I will be glad a concerned writer came to my aid when he did.

I checked out Final Draft. 

I dont work at a bank. But I'm sure at the first day of orientation, they teach you how to use an application written in 1999 in Visual Basic. It hasn't been updated since 2001, it doesn't work very well, everyone hates it, but it's the way it is, and if you trick it, you might be able to do what you want, or wait until its 5pm. It's probably what its like to use Final Draft.

The joy of writing shouldn't feel like working at a bank.

I don't want to throw shade on Final Draft. In fact, it pains me that people have to specifically warn new writers against using it, because it should be laregly irrelevant at this point.

Its important to understand why you need a tool, and what you need it to do.

What am I really doing? I'm writing.

At a high level, let's just think about what the technical basics of a screenplay are. First, it's just text. Second, that text is used to describe 5 basic types: location for a scene, action, character, parenthetical, and dialogue. As long as you write where a scene takes place, what happens, who says what, and maybe a little of how they say it, you have the basics of a screenplay. Theres a little more to it than that, but thats 95% of what it is.

It shouldn't really matter what format I write it in. It's just text. I should be able to use any text editor I want to write a screenplay. 

I googled: "Screenplay Markup." The first result is Foutain. 

Fountain is a very simple way to write a screenplay using just plain text. In fact, it pretty much looks like a screenplay when you're writing it. It is not software. You just write. ..in a super logical syntax.

WHAT? Syntax? It's super logical. Can you type? Do you have parents that aren't siblings? If so, you can write fountain.

In fact, writing in Fountain is a joy. Here is an example of text written in Fountain, for your consideration:

INT. CHARLES'S APARTMENT - DAY

Charles sits at a desk, typing on his computer. David sits behind him on a couch with his laptop.

CHARLES
(to David)
I think I'm going to write this in Fountain.

DAVID
Never heard of it.

CHARLES
I think you're going to like it.

I used an assistant in my process of writing the first draft from a very long outline. I need a sounding board. I need someone bounce ideas off of. I need someone to make sure I'm focused. We used a shared google doc so he could follow along while I was writing. For collaboration, Google Docs was the best I could find. If I was writing solo, I would have just written in Sublime Text.

After 12 days of writing, I had a complete rough draft of my script as a fountain text file. I wanted to see it in screenplay format. I wanted to print it. I needed an app that would convert my fountain file into a PDF. I used an app called Slugline. It's the best. It's also very nice to write in. 

I begun the process of editing. Its hard.



screenplay format

emphasis on page and pagecount







There are two modes, writing and editing.







Finding a process that works for me has also been interesting. 



It has been interesting talking to people


I am very process oriented, so 

The one thing that





youre not writing a screenplay, youre writing a movie.



the tools are in the service of the final product


blog platform

blog post on fountain/building tools

blog post on nuclear

blog post on battery tech




writing process
	outline vs not outlining
	editing
	notes

1 page per minute

fountain: plain text markdown for 

a joy to write

whats beautiful about it?



build your own tools

screenplay format

demand for slightly better tools




final draft sucks
	
print is dead


ability to see the big picture

manage the macro and the micro

beat sheet view

screenplay

markers

stats

javascript great tool

toolmakers are 1%

people that question the system have behavioral problems


model view controller