
I have been thinking a lot about passive informational displays recently. There is a lot of information I want to be displayed, that is there when I want it, that doesn't annoy or distract me. 

False Alarms

There is a phenomenon in modern workplaces where employees work aside their smartphones with the face of the phone always visible. As they are working during the day, their phone will be buzzing and displaying notifications. Every time a notification comes in, the person glances at their phone, they quickly decide if the notification needs their attention. In most cases, it's not important, so they just go back to work. This happens all day.

Context switching

There is a cost to switching from thinking about one thing to another. "So where was I? Ah yes..." It takes time to get back into the mode you were in even just 5 seconds ago. With this happening tens of times per hour, this can eat up a significant portion of your day, and decrease your short term memory.

An alert can come in the form of any noticeable change in a sense over a short period of time: A screen flashes. A telephone rings. Someone taps you on the shoulder. Someone bakes cake. 



One solution is to eliminate 


Computers and smartphones are largely modeless interfaces. You aren't locked down by a single mode. You can really do anything on them limited only by what is possible on that device. Humorously, most phones don't even function very well in the mode they were originally intended for, to make phone calls. I have an iPhone with hundreds of apps on it. I have many specialized apps. I can switch to those apps at any time. I can bring up any type of information. I can go to any website. 

Being a creature of habit, I pretty much only use the same handful of apps everyday. Even when I need to do a specialized rare task with an app, I often don't think to recall the app. Some apps bring me back in from notifications, but because notifications are so overused, this isn't really effective or useful anymore. 

In the physical world, if there were more single mode systems, would people be more focused on the things the aspire to do or know? For example, if I wanted to write more, I might put a table in a room, with a computer on the table that only runs a writing application. I would call it my writing room. Every time I walk into the room, I would interact with the computer to write, the action I aspire to do more of.

A physical clock is a good example of a single mode system. It hangs on the wall. It displays the time. It's positioned so I can mostly see it from anywhere in my small apartment. It is there when I need it. It is not when I don't. When the time changes, it doesn't annoy me. As a display of important information, it is pretty perfect.

In modern times, why even have a clock? You have a phone. You have a computer. Interestingly, most computers always passively display the time. However, sometimes I am not in front of a computer. Sometime I don't have my phone on me. I can simply look at the wall and the information is there.

There are a few pieces of information I wish were passively available to me at all times beyond just the time. weather, schedule, personal fitness, things to think about

friends i havent talked to

macro and micro

the weather

Wifi addressable network passive displays with 


Locations

On common wall area, in the bedroom, in the bathroom, in the kitchen, 




Most of these are 

I incorporate little weather displays into almost every project I work on. 


I have an old 24 inch monitor. It has been collecting dust for the past 2 years. 

No one goes on vacation to avoid relaxing.


single mode displays

In physical space, our spaces have specific modes. 



is this novelty luxury for rich people?